.TH ACDCONTROL 1 "2026-03-19" "acdcontrol" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
acdcontrol \- query and control brightness on supported Apple Cinema and Studio Displays
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B acdcontrol
.RB [ \-\-silent " | " \-s ]
.RB [ \-\-brief " | " \-b ]
.RB [ \-\-help " | " \-h ]
.RB [ \-\-about " | " \-a ]
.RB [ \-\-force " | " \-f ]
.RB [ \-\-detect " | " \-d ]
.RB [ \-\-list-all " | " \-l ]
.RB [ \-\-auto-brightness " {" on | off | status "} ]
.I hid-device
.RI [ brightness ]
.br
.B acdcontrol
.RB [ options ]
.I hid-device...
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B acdcontrol
is a small Unix-style utility for querying or changing monitor brightness
through the Linux
.B hiddev
interface.

In its normal mode,
.B acdcontrol
opens one or more HID device nodes, checks whether each one appears to be a
USB monitor, verifies whether the device is in the built-in support database,
and then reads or writes the monitor brightness through the expected HID
feature report layout.

The default mode is query mode: if no brightness argument is supplied,
.B acdcontrol
reads the current value and prints it.

When a brightness argument is supplied, the utility either sets an absolute
value or applies a relative adjustment. After a write, the utility reads the
value back from the device and prints the returned brightness value.

A device path may be a raw
.B /dev/hiddevN
node or a udev-created alias such as
.BR /dev/acdctl0 ,
depending on local installation and udev rules.

This manual describes the current experimental behavior of the utility as it
exists today. It documents what the tool presently does, not a future driver
interface.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-silent
Suppress non-functional program output.

This is mainly useful for scripts and status bars that only want the command
result and not the startup notice or driver-version banner.
.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-brief
Print only the value in query-like modes.

In ordinary brightness query mode, print only the numeric brightness value.

With
.BR \-\-auto-brightness " status" ,
print only
.BR on ,
.BR off ,
or
.BR unknown .

In brightness set modes,
.B \-\-brief
does not suppress the final brightness value; it only affects the label text.
.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Continue even if the detected device is not present in the built-in supported
device database.

This does
.I not
skip the USB-monitor check. A device that is unsupported but still exposes the
expected USB monitor HID layout may work. A device that is not a USB monitor
will still be rejected.
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-detect
Detection-only mode.

In this mode,
.B acdcontrol
does not attempt to read or write brightness. Instead, it scans the given HID
device node(s), identifies USB-monitor-class HID devices, and prints whether
each one is currently
.B SUPPORTED
or
.B UNSUPPORTED
according to the built-in device database.

This is the safest first step when identifying the correct HID device for a
candidate monitor.
.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list-all
Print the current built-in support database and exit.
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-auto-brightness " mode
Control or query auto-brightness on displays whose auto-brightness mapping is
known to this utility.

Valid values are:
.BR on ,
.BR off ,
and
.BR status .

This option cannot be combined with a brightness operand.
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print short usage help and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-about
Print program credits and about text and exit.
.
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
.I hid-device
One or more HID device nodes to inspect or control.

Examples:
.BR /dev/hiddev0 ,
.BR /dev/hiddev1 ,
.BR /dev/acdctl0 .
.
.TP
.I brightness
Brightness value to apply.

Valid forms are:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
Absolute value, for example
.BR 650
.IP \(bu 3
Relative increase, for example
.BR +10
.IP \(bu 3
Relative decrease, for example
.BR "\-\- -10"
.RE

The
.B \-\-
separator is recommended before a negative relative value so the shell and
option parser do not treat it as another option.
.
.SH MODES OF OPERATION
.SS Query mode
If no brightness operand is given and
.B \-\-auto-brightness
is not used,
.B acdcontrol
reads the current brightness and prints it.

By default the output format is:
.PP
.RS
.I device
.BR ": BRIGHTNESS="
.I value
.RE
.
.SS Absolute set mode
If a plain integer brightness operand is supplied,
.B acdcontrol
treats it as the desired target value.

The current implementation clamps the value into the range 0 to 1023 before
writing it to the device, then reads the brightness back and prints the value
returned by the monitor.
.
.SS Relative set mode
If the brightness operand begins with
.B +
or
.BR \- ,
.B acdcontrol
first reads the current brightness, adds the requested delta, clamps the
result to the range 0 to 1023, writes the new value, reads it back, and
prints the returned value.
.
.SS Detection mode
With
.BR \-\-detect ,
the utility reports whether each supplied HID device appears to be a USB
monitor and whether it matches an entry in the support database.

Detection mode does not attempt to change brightness.
.
.SS Auto-brightness mode
With
.BR \-\-auto-brightness ,
the utility either sets or queries the display auto-brightness state and also
prints the current brightness.

In non-brief mode the output format is:
.PP
.RS
.I device
.BR ": AUTO_BRIGHTNESS="
.I state
.BR " BRIGHTNESS="
.I value
.RE

In brief mode, only the auto-brightness state is printed for
.BR status .
.
.SH DEVICE SUPPORT MODEL
By default,
.B acdcontrol
uses a conservative policy: if a device is not in the built-in support
database, it prints an unsupported-device message and exits with status 2.

With
.BR \-\-force ,
the utility continues past that policy check and tries the generic brightness
path anyway, provided the HID device still identifies as a USB monitor.

This means:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
unsupported does not always mean impossible
.IP \(bu 3
known support improves confidence
.IP \(bu 3
candidate devices should be tested carefully, starting with
.BR \-\-detect
.RE

The current implementation uses one generic brightness HID mapping for all
supported and forced devices. It does not yet choose different brightness
report layouts or value ranges on a per-model basis.
.
.SH SUPPORTED HARDWARE
At the time of this manual revision, the built-in support database includes
these device families:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Studio Display 15"
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Studio Display 17"
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Cinema Display 20" (old, new, and alt variants)
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Cinema Display 23" (old and new variants)
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Cinema Display 24"
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Cinema Display 30"
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Cinema HD Display 27"
.IP \(bu 3
Apple Cinema HD Display 30"
.IP \(bu 3
Apple LED Cinema Display 24"
.IP \(bu 3
Samsung SyncMaster 757NF
.RE

For the authoritative runtime list on your build, use:
.PP
.RS
.B acdcontrol --list-all
.RE
.
.SH AUTO-BRIGHTNESS
Auto-brightness support is currently narrower than brightness support.

At present, the utility only treats Apple product ID
.B 0x9226
as having a known auto-brightness mapping.

The current auto-brightness mapping uses:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
report ID 102
.IP \(bu 3
usage code 0x820066
.IP \(bu 3
value 1 for off
.IP \(bu 3
value 2 for on
.RE

If
.B \-\-auto-brightness
is requested on a display whose mapping is not yet known,
.B acdcontrol
prints an error and exits with status 2.
.
.SH OUTPUT
In ordinary query mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/dev/acdctl0: BRIGHTNESS=612
.fi
.RE

In brief query mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
612
.fi
.RE

In auto-brightness status mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/dev/acdctl0: AUTO_BRIGHTNESS=on BRIGHTNESS=612
.fi
.RE

In brief auto-brightness status mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
on
.fi
.RE

In detection mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/dev/acdctl4: USB Monitor - SUPPORTED.    Vendor=0x05ac (Apple), Product=0x9226[Apple Cinema HD Display 27"]
.fi
.RE
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The current implementation uses these status codes in common cases:
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.
.TP
.B 1
Missing required device operands, or certain fatal low-level setup or I/O
errors.
.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line usage or policy refusal, including cases such as:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
unknown option
.IP \(bu 3
invalid brightness argument
.IP \(bu 3
invalid auto-brightness mode
.IP \(bu 3
unsupported device without
.BR \-\-force
.IP \(bu 3
requesting auto-brightness on a display whose mapping is not yet known
.RE
.
.TP
.B 4
Unexpected HID usage code during report validation.
.
.PP
Per-device open and some ioctl failures may be reported while processing a list
of devices. The program does not currently provide a rich aggregated summary
status for multi-device runs, so scripts should inspect stderr as well as the
exit code.
.
.SH SAFETY NOTES
Run
.B acdcontrol --detect
before trying writes on an unknown device.

Use
.B \-\-force
only when you intentionally want to test a candidate monitor that is not yet
in the support database.

Because the project is still experimental, monitor families from different
controller eras may expose different effective behavior even when the generic
brightness path works. A successful read or write on one Apple display model
does not prove identical behavior on another.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
List devices currently hard-coded as supported:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol --list-all
.fi
.RE

Detect which HID device belongs to the monitor:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol --detect /dev/acdctl*
.fi
.RE

Read current brightness:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0
.fi
.RE

Set an absolute brightness:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 650
.fi
.RE

Increase brightness by 10:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 +10
.fi
.RE

Decrease brightness by 10:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 -- -10
.fi
.RE

Query auto-brightness status:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 --auto-brightness status
.fi
.RE

Enable auto-brightness on a display with a known mapping:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 --auto-brightness on
.fi
.RE
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /dev/hiddevN
Raw Linux HID device nodes.
.
.TP
.I /dev/acdctlN
Possible udev-created aliases for monitor HID nodes, depending on local
installation.
.
.SH NOTES
This utility currently targets the Linux
.B hiddev
interface.

Its present brightness implementation assumes a generic feature-report layout
with brightness usage code
.BR 0x820010 ,
report ID
.BR 16 ,
field index 0, and usage index 0, clamped to the range 0 to 1023.

That behavior is documented here because it explains both why some unsupported
devices may still work with
.B \-\-force
and why future model-specific refinements may be needed.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR acdprobe (1)
.
.SH AUTHORS
Original project by the upstream
.B acdcontrol
authors.

This manual page documents the behavior of the current experimental
.B acdcontrol
tree and is intended to be maintained alongside the source.
