.TH ACDPROBE 1 "2026-03-19" "acdcontrol" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
acdprobe \- inspect Apple monitor HID interfaces and collect probe bundles
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B acdprobe
.RB [ \-\-save-dir " " DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-collect ]
.RB [ \-\-profile " " NAME ]
.RB [ \-\-json " " PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-text " " PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-csv " " PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-descriptor " " PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-set-feature " " R " " F " " U " " V ]
.RB [ \-\-readback-delay-ms " " N ]
.RB [ \-\-no-save ]
.RB [ \-\-quiet " | " \-q ]
.I hid-device
.br
.B acdprobe
.RB [ \-\-help " | " \-h ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B acdprobe
is the companion inspection tool for
.BR acdcontrol (1).
It probes a single Linux
.B hiddev
device node, reads HID identity and report metadata, decodes applications,
fields, and usages, and emits one or more report files for review,
reverse-engineering, and contribution.

In normal probe mode,
.B acdprobe
reads the device state and generates a human-readable text report, a full JSON
report, a flat CSV usage listing, and, when available through sysfs, a raw
hex dump of the HID report descriptor.

In collect mode, the tool writes a standardized bundle layout intended for
community submission and later analysis. Collect mode also adds a compact
.B summary.json
file.

The tool can also perform one experimental feature write with
.BR \-\-set-feature ,
validate the requested value against the HID logical range, write it, read it
back immediately, and optionally read it back again after a delay.

This manual documents the current behavior of the experimental utility as it
exists today.
.
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
.I hid-device
A single HID device node to inspect.

Examples:
.BR /dev/hiddev4 ,
.BR /dev/acdctl4 .
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-\-save-dir " DIR
Base output directory for generated files.

The default is:
.BR probes/raw .

In ordinary probe mode, default files are written under a
.B VID_PID
subdirectory inside this base directory.

In collect mode, the default base
.B probes/raw
is treated specially and produces a bundle under
.B probes/VID_PID/
instead of
.BR probes/raw/VID_PID/ .
If a non-default save directory is given, collect mode uses
.B DIR/VID_PID/
instead.
.
.TP
.B \-\-collect
Enable standardized bundle output.

This changes the default filenames from interface-specific names such as
.B VID_PID-ifN.json
to fixed bundle names such as
.BR report.json ,
.BR report.txt ,
.BR report.csv ,
.BR report_descriptor.hex ,
and
.BR summary.json .
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-profile " NAME
Use a named probe workflow profile.

The currently recognized profiles are:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
.B basic-readonly
.IP \(bu 3
.B full-readonly
.IP \(bu 3
.B als-discovery
.RE

Selecting any profile currently implies
.BR \-\-collect .

The two readonly profiles reject
.BR \-\-set-feature .
The
.B als-discovery
profile allows experimental feature writes.
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-json " PATH
Write the full JSON report to
.IR PATH .
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-text " PATH
Write the human-readable text report to
.IR PATH .
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-csv " PATH
Write the flat CSV usage listing to
.IR PATH .
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-descriptor " PATH
Write the raw HID report descriptor as hexadecimal text to
.IR PATH .

If the report descriptor cannot be located through sysfs, the tool prints a
warning and skips this file.
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-set-feature " "R F U V"
Experimentally write one HID feature usage and read it back.

Arguments are:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
.B R
\- feature report ID
.IP \(bu 3
.B F
\- field index
.IP \(bu 3
.B U
\- usage index
.IP \(bu 3
.B V
\- signed integer value to request
.RE

The tool opens the device read-write, looks up the target feature metadata,
verifies that the requested value is within the HID logical range, writes the
usage, pushes the feature report back to the device, then performs immediate
readback. The probe report includes the before, requested, and after values.
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-readback-delay-ms " N
After a successful
.B \-\-set-feature
write and immediate readback, sleep
.I N
milliseconds and perform one more delayed readback.

This option is ignored unless
.B \-\-set-feature
is also present.
.
.TP
.B \-\-no-save
Do not auto-generate the default output paths.

This is useful for print-only runs.

Current behavior is intentionally narrow:
.B \-\-no-save
suppresses the default file layout, but explicitly requested output paths from
.BR \-\-json ,
.BR \-\-text ,
.BR \-\-csv ,
or
.B \-\-descriptor
are still honored.
.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Do not print the text report and summary line to standard output.

When files are written, the tool still prints the final
.B Saved ...
status lines for those files.
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage help and exit.
.
.SH MODES
.SS Ordinary probe mode
With only a device operand,
.B acdprobe
probes the target and writes the default raw report set:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
full JSON report
.IP \(bu 3
human-readable text report
.IP \(bu 3
flat CSV usage dump
.IP \(bu 3
report descriptor hex dump, if available
.RE

The default layout is:
.PP
.RS
.nf
probes/raw/VID_PID/VID_PID-ifN.json
probes/raw/VID_PID/VID_PID-ifN.txt
probes/raw/VID_PID/VID_PID-ifN.csv
probes/raw/VID_PID/VID_PID-ifN.rdesc.hex
.fi
.RE
.
.SS Collect mode
With
.BR \-\-collect ,
or implicitly through
.BR \-\-profile ,
the tool writes a standardized bundle layout:
.PP
.RS
.nf
probes/VID_PID/report.json
probes/VID_PID/report.txt
probes/VID_PID/report.csv
probes/VID_PID/report_descriptor.hex
probes/VID_PID/summary.json
.fi
.RE

When
.B \-\-save-dir
is set to a value other than the default
.BR probes/raw ,
the collect bundle is written under
.BR DIR/VID_PID/ .
.
.SS Feature-write mode
With
.BR \-\-set-feature ,
the tool performs one feature write before the ordinary probe pass.

The resulting text and JSON reports include a
.B feature_write
section describing the attempted write, the usage code, the logical range, and
the before/after values.
.
.SH PROFILES
The current profile names are mainly workflow and safety selectors.

.TP
.B basic-readonly
Named readonly collection workflow.
Currently implies collect mode and rejects
.BR \-\-set-feature .
.
.TP
.B full-readonly
Named readonly collection workflow.
Currently implies collect mode and rejects
.BR \-\-set-feature .
.
.TP
.B als-discovery
Named experimental collection workflow for ambient-light-sensor and
auto-brightness style exploration.
Currently implies collect mode and permits
.BR \-\-set-feature .
.
.PP
At present, profiles mostly affect collect-mode selection and write policy.
They do not yet define deeply different probe scopes.
.
.SH REPORT CONTENT
.SS Text report
The text report includes:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
probe timestamp
.IP \(bu 3
device node
.IP \(bu 3
HID and USB identity fields
.IP \(bu 3
string descriptors
.IP \(bu 3
application usages
.IP \(bu 3
decoded hints
.IP \(bu 3
macOS parameter hints
.IP \(bu 3
vendor-private telemetry candidates
.IP \(bu 3
input, output, and feature report dumps
.IP \(bu 3
optional feature-write result block
.RE
.
.SS JSON report
The JSON report is the full structured probe artifact.

It includes target identity, strings, applications, report trees, decoded
candidate hints, optional feature-write information, and additional metadata
useful for later review.
.
.SS CSV report
The CSV report is a flattened usage-oriented listing of the probed HID report
data. It is intended for quick scanning, filtering, and ad hoc comparison.
.
.SS Summary report
The
.B summary.json
file is written only in collect mode.

It is a compact derived artifact intended for submission, indexing, and quick
comparison. The repository documents its schema separately in
.BR docs/summary-schema.rst .
.
.SH FEATURE WRITE SEMANTICS
When
.B \-\-set-feature
is used,
.B acdprobe
performs the following high-level sequence:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
Open the target device read-write.
.IP 2.
Read feature metadata for the specified report, field, and usage.
.IP 3.
Validate the requested value against the HID logical range.
.IP 4.
Write the usage value.
.IP 5.
Push the feature report back to the device.
.IP 6.
Read the same usage back immediately.
.IP 7.
Optionally sleep and read it back again after
.BR \-\-readback-delay-ms .
.IP 8.
Run the normal probe and include the write result in the reports.
.RE

Readonly profiles reject this mode with an error.

A failed write aborts the run before the later probe output is produced.
.
.SH OUTPUT
Unless
.B \-\-quiet
is used, the tool prints the text report followed by a short summary line such
as:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Summary: 3 input reports, 0 output reports, 7 feature reports
.fi
.RE

When files are written, the tool also prints save-status lines such as:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Saved JSON: probes/05ac_9226/report.json
Saved text: probes/05ac_9226/report.txt
Saved CSV: probes/05ac_9226/report.csv
Saved summary: probes/05ac_9226/summary.json
Saved descriptor hex: probes/05ac_9226/report_descriptor.hex
.fi
.RE
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.
.TP
.B 1
Probe failure, feature-write failure, output-directory creation failure,
or report-file write failure.
.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line usage, including:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
unknown option
.IP \(bu 3
missing device operand
.IP \(bu 3
invalid arguments for
.BR \-\-set-feature
.IP \(bu 3
invalid value for
.BR \-\-readback-delay-ms
.IP \(bu 3
unknown profile name
.IP \(bu 3
attempting
.B \-\-set-feature
with a readonly profile
.RE
.
.SH SAFETY NOTES
Start with a readonly run on any unfamiliar device.

For contribution and review workflows, prefer:
.PP
.RS
.B acdprobe --collect /dev/acdctlN
.RE

Use
.B \-\-set-feature
only when you deliberately want to test a specific feature usage and are ready
to examine the resulting before/after values.

Remember that a successful write on one monitor model or controller generation
does not prove the same behavior on another.
.
.SH PRIVACY NOTES
Collect mode is intended to produce a standardized, privacy-safer bundle for
sharing, but you should still review generated artifacts before submitting
them.

In particular, inspect:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
USB identity strings
.IP \(bu 3
descriptor dumps
.IP \(bu 3
text and JSON reports
.RE
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Probe a candidate device and save the default raw layout:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe /dev/acdctl4
.fi
.RE

Probe without auto-generating default files:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe /dev/acdctl4 --no-save
.fi
.RE

Create a standardized collect bundle:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe --collect /dev/acdctl4
.fi
.RE

Use a readonly named profile:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe --profile basic-readonly /dev/acdctl4
.fi
.RE

Use the ALS discovery profile and perform an experimental feature write:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe --profile als-discovery /dev/acdctl4 --set-feature 102 0 0 2
.fi
.RE

Perform an experimental feature write without a profile:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe /dev/acdctl4 --set-feature 102 0 0 2
.fi
.RE

Perform a write and delayed readback:
.PP
.RS
.nf
acdprobe /dev/acdctl4 --set-feature 102 0 0 2 --readback-delay-ms 500
.fi
.RE
.
.SH NOTES
The current source documents these confirmed HID findings on the Apple LED
Cinema Display 27-inch (USB ID
.BR 05ac:9226 ):
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
report 16 / usage 0x00820010 = brightness
.IP \(bu 3
report 102 / usage 0x00820066 = ambient-light-sensor / auto-brightness style control
.RE

The source also documents tentative vendor-private findings for report 225 /
usage 0xff9200e1 and report 236 / usage 0xff9200ec.

These notes are useful for interpreting
.B als-discovery
and for understanding the current summary and hint generation.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /dev/hiddevN
Raw Linux HID device nodes.
.
.TP
.I /dev/acdctlN
Possible udev-created aliases for selected monitor HID nodes.
.
.TP
.I probes/raw/
Default base directory for ordinary probe runs.
.
.TP
.I probes/VID_PID/
Default collect bundle directory when
.B \-\-collect
is used with the default save-dir base.
.
.TP
.I docs/summary-schema.rst
Repository documentation for the compact
.B summary.json
collect artifact.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR acdcontrol (1)
.
.SH AUTHORS
This manual page documents the behavior of the current experimental
.B acdprobe
tree and is intended to be maintained alongside the source.
