======================================
Apple Cinema Display Brightness Control
======================================

``acdcontrol`` is a small Unix-style utility for querying and changing the
brightness of supported Apple Cinema and Studio Displays through the HID
interface exposed by Linux.

The project currently ships two command-line tools:

* ``acdcontrol`` for stable user-facing control paths such as brightness
* ``acdprobe`` for device inspection, discovery, and HID capability collection

This repository is focused on the utility itself. Lower-level driver work may
happen in a future separate project.

Current status
--------------

``acdcontrol`` is usable today, but the hardware matrix is still growing.

Support in this repository should be understood in three layers:

* officially supported models listed by the tool
* candidate USB monitor devices that may still work through the same HID control
  layout
* experimental probing and feature discovery through ``acdprobe``

A display not appearing in the official support list does not automatically mean
it cannot work. It may simply mean it has not been tested and documented yet.

Build
-----

Clone this repository::

    git clone https://github.com/johngrimmreaper/acdcontrol.git
    cd acdcontrol

Build both binaries::

    make

This should produce ``acdcontrol`` and ``acdprobe`` in the repository root.

If the build fails, make sure the required development tools are installed,
for example ``build-essential`` on Debian/Ubuntu systems.

A helper script is also included::

    ./acd-compile.sh

This uses the bundled ``docker-compose.yml`` file and requires Docker and
Docker Compose.

Installation
------------

Install the binaries and udev rules::

    sudo make install

Reload udev rules::

    sudo udevadm control --reload
    sudo udevadm trigger

Remove installed files::

    sudo make uninstall

For staged installs and packaging::

    make install DESTDIR=/tmp/acd-stage

Quick start
-----------

List officially supported displays::

    ./acdcontrol --list-all

Detect which HID device belongs to the monitor::

    ./acdcontrol --detect /dev/acdctl*

Read the current brightness::

    ./acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0

Set an absolute brightness value::

    ./acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 650

Increase brightness by 10::

    ./acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 +10

Decrease brightness by 10::

    ./acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 -- -10

Read auto-brightness status on supported models::

    ./acdcontrol /dev/acdctl0 --auto-brightness status

Probe a candidate device and save a report bundle::

    ./acdprobe --collect /dev/acdctl4

Documentation map
-----------------

For now, use these entry points depending on what you need:

* ``./acdcontrol --help``
    Current command-line help for the main utility.

* ``./acdprobe --help``
    Current command-line help for the probe utility.

* ``docs/summary-schema.rst``
    Reference for the compact ``summary.json`` file generated by
    ``acdprobe --collect``.

The long-term documentation direction is:

* short top-level ``README.rst`` as the project landing page
* curated manual pages for ``acdcontrol`` and ``acdprobe``
* focused technical notes under ``docs/`` for schema, model findings,
  and reverse-engineering notes

Compatibility and safety notes
------------------------------

Detection mode does not write brightness values, so it is the safest first step
when identifying a candidate HID device::

    ./acdcontrol --detect /dev/acdctl*

Brightness behavior and useful ranges may vary by monitor model.

Unsupported hardware is not always impossible hardware. Some unknown devices may
still work if they expose the same expected HID control layout, but unsupported
devices should be treated carefully and tested deliberately.

Native auto-brightness support is currently implemented only for the Apple LED
Cinema Display 27-inch with USB ID ``05ac:9226``.

acdprobe in one paragraph
-------------------------

``acdprobe`` is the companion tool for inspecting supported or candidate monitor
HID interfaces, exporting report information, and collecting stable per-device
artifacts for review and contribution.

For community submissions, prefer collect mode::

    ./acdprobe --collect /dev/acdctl4

The collected ``summary.json`` format is documented in
``docs/summary-schema.rst``.

Contributing
------------

Contributions are welcome, especially:

* probe bundles for additional Apple display models
* confirmation of working brightness or auto-brightness mappings
* documentation improvements
* carefully reviewed code improvements

When contributing probe artifacts, start with readonly collection and review the
generated files before sharing them.

License
-------

See ``COPYING`` and ``COPYRIGHT``.