=========================================
Model Notes: Apple LED Cinema Display 27"
=========================================

USB identity
============

* Vendor ID: ``05ac``
* Product ID: ``9226``

This file records the current project findings for the Apple LED Cinema Display
27-inch. It is the first model note because it is the display with the strongest
confirmed evidence in the current tree and the model that already has native
auto-brightness support mapped in ``acdcontrol``.


Status of current knowledge
===========================

This model is the current reference monitor for confirmed HID control mapping in
the repository.

Probe output and controlled write/readback testing support these findings:

* feature report ``16`` / usage ``0x00820010`` = confirmed brightness control
* feature report ``102`` / usage ``0x00820066`` = confirmed ambient-light-sensor
  / auto-brightness style control
* feature report ``225`` / usage ``0xff9200e1`` = tentative vendor-private
  boolean
* feature report ``236`` / usage ``0xff9200ec`` = tentative vendor-private
  data/status

At the moment, the confirmed mapping for report ``102`` is:

* ``1`` = auto-brightness off
* ``2`` = auto-brightness on

Reports ``225`` and ``236`` remain under investigation.


Confirmed controls
==================

Brightness
----------

The project currently treats feature report ``16`` / usage ``0x00820010`` as
the confirmed brightness control on this display.

This is the control path that underlies the current ``acdcontrol`` brightness
support.

Auto-brightness
---------------

The project currently treats feature report ``102`` / usage ``0x00820066`` as
the confirmed ambient-light-sensor / auto-brightness style control on this
display.

This is the mapping currently implemented by ``acdcontrol`` for native
auto-brightness control on USB ID ``05ac:9226``.

Current confirmed values:

* ``1`` = off
* ``2`` = on


Tentative controls
==================

Vendor-private boolean
----------------------

Feature report ``225`` / usage ``0xff9200e1`` is currently treated as a
tentative vendor-private boolean.

It is useful enough to keep in summaries and model notes, but not yet strong
enough to treat as established behavior.

Vendor-private status/data
--------------------------

Feature report ``236`` / usage ``0xff9200ec`` is currently treated as a
tentative vendor-private data/status control.

At present it should be viewed as unresolved telemetry or state-like data, not
as a confirmed user-facing feature.


How this note relates to ``summary.json``
=========================================

In collected probe bundles for this monitor, the compact ``summary.json`` should
reflect the current project confidence model:

* brightness should appear as a ``known`` control
* the ambient-light-sensor / auto-brightness control should appear as a
  ``known`` control
* vendor-private unresolved items may appear in the dedicated
  ``telemetry_candidates`` section with weaker confidence labels such as
  ``candidate`` or ``tentative``

For the exact field meanings and confidence vocabulary, see
``docs/summary-schema.rst``.


Why this model note exists
==========================

The goal of a model note is to keep per-monitor findings out of the top-level
README while still preserving the reasoning that matters to maintainers and
contributors.

This file is intentionally narrower than a man page and more stable than a
reverse-engineering scratchpad. It should answer:

* what is confirmed
* what is still tentative
* which report and usage pairs matter
* what reviewers should expect to see in collected summaries


What remains open
=================

The following questions are still open for this model:

* whether additional vendor-private controls have a stable user-facing meaning
* whether report ``225`` and report ``236`` map to ALS-related state, monitor
  telemetry, or unrelated controller internals
* whether more cross-platform comparison is needed before raising confidence on
  unresolved controls

Until stronger evidence exists, unresolved controls should stay documented as
tentative rather than being promoted into stable supported behavior.


Related files
=============

* ``man/acdcontrol.1``
* ``man/acdprobe.1``
* ``docs/probe-workflow.rst``
* ``docs/summary-schema.rst``
